docs/komponentor.md, before:

# Komponentor

Komponentor is a lightweight JavaScript framework for loading HTML components by URL, managing a tree of components with lifecycle and destroy cascades, and optional hash-based routing and headless intents.

**File:** `src/komponentor.js`  
**Dependencies:** None required; jQuery is used only as a helper if present.

---

## Public API

| Method | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `komponentor.root(host, urlOrOpts)` | Set the app root: mount component at `host`, destroy any existing root. Returns the root Komponent instance. |
| `komponentor.mount(host, urlOrOpts)` | Mount a component at `host`. Returns the Komponent instance (mount runs async). |
| `komponentor.scan(container?, { parent?, replaceExisting? })` | Scan `container` (default `document.body`) for `data-komponent` markers and mount components. |
| `komponentor.route({ outlet, routes, notFound })` | Configure and start the hash router. |
| `komponentor.navigate(hash)` | Set `location.hash` (triggers route handler). |
| `komponentor.intent(urlOrOpts)` | Fluent intent builder: `.data(key, val)` or `.data(obj)`, then `.send({ parent })` -> runs intent and returns the Intent. |
| `komponentor.runIntent(url, data, { parent })` | Convenience: run an intent and return it after completion. |

---

## Configuration

The global `komponentor` is a **Komponentor** instance. If you assign a plain object to `komponentor` before the script runs, it is used as initial config.

```javascript
komponentor.config.debug = true;
komponentor.config.baseUrl = "/api";   // prepended to URLs starting with /
komponentor.config.markerAttr = "data-komponent";
komponentor.config.overlayClass = "komponent-overlay";
komponentor.config.overlayHtml = "<div>Loading</div>";
komponentor.config.errorHtml = (url, err) => `<div>Failed: ${url}</div>`;
komponentor.config.fetchOptions = {};  // passed to fetch()
```

---

## Component marker

Declare child components in HTML:

```html
<div data-komponent="/path/to/component.html"></div>
<div data-komponent="/view.html|id=5|foo=bar"></div>
```

- **Spec format:** `url|key=value|key2=value2` — URL plus optional pipe-separated key=value pairs merged into `data`.
- Other `data-*` attributes on the element are also merged into the component's `data` (camelCase keys).

---

## Mount options

`urlOrOpts` can be a string (URL or full spec) or an object:

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `url` | Component HTML URL (or spec with `|key=val`). |
| `data` | Object merged with parsed spec/attributes, passed to `init_komponent(k, data)`. |
| `replace` | If true, destroy existing component on same host before mounting. |
| `autoload` | If true (default), scan for `data-komponent` children after mount. |
| `overlay` | If true (default), show loading overlay during fetch. |
| `parent` | Komponent or Intent instance; new component is attached as child. |

---

## Komponent instance

Each mounted component is a **Komponent** with:

- **`hostEl`** - DOM element that hosts the component.
- **`opts`** - Normalized mount options.
- **`data`** - Data passed to init.
- **`ctx`** - **Context** (see below).
- **`parent`** / **`children`** - Component tree (parent may be Komponent or Intent).

**Methods:**

- **`find(selector)`** - `hostEl.querySelector(selector)`.
- **`findAll(selector)`** - `hostEl.querySelectorAll(selector)` as array.
- **`mount()`** - Run mount (fetch, render, init). Returns a Promise; usually called internally.
- **`scan({ replaceExisting })`** - Scan this component’s host for `data-komponent` and mount children (once per lifetime unless `replaceExisting: true`).
- **`remount()`** - Destroy this component and mount a fresh one on the same host.
- **`destroy()`** - Destroy children, destroy context, clear `hostEl.innerHTML`, unlink from parent.

---

## Context (lifecycle and events)

Each Komponent (and Intent) has a **Context** `k.ctx`:

- **`k.ctx.id`** - Unique id.
- **`k.ctx.ready`** - True after init has run.
- **`k.ctx.state`** - `"initial"` | `"loading"` | `"rendering"` | `"init"` | `"ready"` | `"error"` | `"destroying"` | `"destroyed"`.
- **`k.ctx.parent`** - Parent context (if any).
- **`k.ctx.children`** - Child contexts.

**Events:** `on(event, fn, ctx)`, `off(event, fn, ctx)`, `trigger(event, payload)`.

- **`state:change`** - `{ state, ctx }`.
- **`state:<name>`** - When state becomes `<name>`.
- **`context:destroy`** - When context is being destroyed.

**Lifecycle:**

- **`onDestroy(fn)`** - Register a function to run when the context is destroyed (children destroyed first, then destroyers in reverse order).
- **`requestText(url, fetchOpts)`** - Fetch URL with abort on destroy or new request; returns response text or null if stale/destroyed.
- **`requestAbort()`** - Abort current request.
- **`emitUp(event, payload)`** - Trigger event on this context and each parent up the tree.
- **`emitRoot(event, payload)`** - Trigger event on the root context.
- **`destroy()`** - Abort request, destroy children, run destroyers, clear events.

---

## Init convention

Fetched HTML may contain a `<script>` that defines:

```javascript
function init_komponent(k, data) {
  // k = Komponent (or Intent) instance
  // data = opts.data
  // Use k.ctx.onDestroy(() => { ... }) for cleanup
}
```

If present, this function is called after the fragment is rendered into the host. Scripts are stripped from the fragment; only the function is extracted and run in an isolated scope.

---

## Intents (headless)

Intents load component HTML and run its init **without** rendering into a host. Use for modals, workers, or logic-only “components”.

**Fluent builder:**

```javascript
const intent = await komponentor.intent("modal.html|id=1")
  .data("model", myModel)
  .data({ source: k })
  .send({ parent: k });
// intent.ctx.ready, intent.data; intent may mount DOM inside its init
```

**Convenience:**

```javascript
const intent = await komponentor.runIntent("service/worker.html", { task: "sync" });
```

- **`parent`** - Optional Komponent or Intent; the new Intent is attached as child and destroyed when parent is destroyed.
- Intent has **`ctx`**, **`url`**, **`data`**, **`children`**, **`run()`**, **`destroy()`**. It does not replace any DOM; init can use `komponentor.mount()` if needed.

---

## Hash router

```javascript
komponentor.route({
  outlet: "#app",           // selector for mount target
  routes: {
    "#/": "view1.html",
    "#/users/:id": "user.html"
  },
  notFound: "404.html"      // optional
});
```

- Routes are matched by hash (e.g. `#/users/5`). Pattern `:id` captures one segment.
- On match, the outlet is mounted with `url` and `data: { route: { hash, params } }`, with `replace: true`.
- **`komponentor.navigate(hash)`** - Sets `location.hash` (handler runs on `hashchange`).

---

## Exposed classes

For advanced use, the following are attached to `komponentor`:

- **`Komponentor`** - Manager class.
- **`Komponent`** - Component node class.
- **`Context`** - Lifecycle/event context.
- **`HashRouter`** - Router class.
- **`Intent`** - Intent class.

---

## Load order

1. jQuery (optional).
2. `komponentor.js`.


---

## Quick example

```html
<div id="app" data-komponent="app.html"></div>
<script src="komponentor.js"></script>
<script>
  komponentor.config.baseUrl = "./";
  komponentor.root("#app", "app.html");
</script>
```

Or with router:

```javascript
komponentor.route({ outlet: "#app", routes: { "#/": "home.html" } });
```

Commit message:

Enhance documentation and examples for `replaceHost` option
- Added detailed explanation of `replaceHost` behavior in `komponentor.md`.
- Updated example in `app.html` to demonstrate usage of `replaceHost: true`.
- Modified `komponentor.js` to clarify the implications of `replaceHost` in comments and code.

docs/komponentor.md, after:

# Komponentor

Komponentor is a lightweight JavaScript framework for loading HTML components by URL, managing a tree of components with lifecycle and destroy cascades, and optional hash-based routing and headless intents.

**File:** `src/komponentor.js`  
**Dependencies:** None required; jQuery is used only as a helper if present.

---

## Public API

| Method | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `komponentor.root(host, urlOrOpts)` | Set the app root: mount component at `host`, destroy any existing root. Returns the root Komponent instance. |
| `komponentor.mount(host, urlOrOpts)` | Mount a component at `host`. Returns the Komponent instance (mount runs async). |
| `komponentor.scan(container?, { parent?, replaceExisting? })` | Scan `container` (default `document.body`) for `data-komponent` markers and mount components. |
| `komponentor.route({ outlet, routes, notFound })` | Configure and start the hash router. |
| `komponentor.navigate(hash)` | Set `location.hash` (triggers route handler). |
| `komponentor.intent(urlOrOpts)` | Fluent intent builder: `.data(key, val)` or `.data(obj)`, then `.send({ parent })` -> runs intent and returns the Intent. |
| `komponentor.runIntent(url, data, { parent })` | Convenience: run an intent and return it after completion. |

---

## Configuration

The global `komponentor` is a **Komponentor** instance. If you assign a plain object to `komponentor` before the script runs, it is used as initial config.

```javascript
komponentor.config.debug = true;
komponentor.config.baseUrl = "/api";   // prepended to URLs starting with /
komponentor.config.markerAttr = "data-komponent";
komponentor.config.overlayClass = "komponent-overlay";
komponentor.config.overlayHtml = "<div>Loading</div>";
komponentor.config.errorHtml = (url, err) => `<div>Failed: ${url}</div>`;
komponentor.config.fetchOptions = {};  // passed to fetch()
```

---

## Component marker

Declare child components in HTML:

```html
<div data-komponent="/path/to/component.html"></div>
<div data-komponent="/view.html|id=5|foo=bar"></div>
```

- **Spec format:** `url|key=value|key2=value2` — URL plus optional pipe-separated key=value pairs merged into `data`.
- Other `data-*` attributes on the element are also merged into the component's `data` (camelCase keys).

---

## Mount options

`urlOrOpts` can be a string (URL or full spec) or an object:

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `url` | Component HTML URL (or spec with `|key=val`). |
| `data` | Object merged with parsed spec/attributes, passed to `init_komponent(k, data)`. |
| `replace` | If true, destroy existing component on same host before mounting. |
| `replaceHost` | If true, **replace** the host element with the component root (host is removed from DOM). See implications below. |
| `autoload` | If true (default), scan for `data-komponent` children after mount. |
| `overlay` | If true (default), show loading overlay during fetch. |
| `parent` | Komponent or Intent instance; new component is attached as child. |

### Implications of `replaceHost: true`

- **Default (`replaceHost: false`):** The host element stays; its `innerHTML` is cleared and the component content is appended inside it. On destroy, only the host’s contents are cleared; the host remains.
- **With `replaceHost: true`:** The host node is **removed** and the component’s root (first element from the template, or a wrapper if the template has 0 or multiple top-level nodes) is inserted in its place. The component’s `hostEl` is updated to this new root, and the instance is re-attached to it (`KEY_INST`). The host’s **`id`** is copied to the new root so selectors like `#app` still resolve (e.g. for the router outlet).
- **Destroy:** With replace-host, `destroy()` **removes** the component root from the DOM and clears the instance reference. With default behavior, destroy only clears `hostEl.innerHTML`.
- **remount():** With replace-host, after `destroy()` the previous root is no longer in the document. `remount()` then calls `mount(this.hostEl, ...)` on that detached node, so the new component’s content is not in the document. Prefer creating a new host and calling `mount(host, urlOrOpts)` yourself when using replace-host and needing to “remount”.
- **Router:** Using `replaceHost: true` on the root/outlet (e.g. `root("#app", "app.html", { replaceHost: true })`) is fine: the new root keeps the host’s `id`, so the outlet selector `#app` still works for the next route change.

---

## Komponent instance

Each mounted component is a **Komponent** with:

- **`hostEl`** - DOM element that hosts the component.
- **`opts`** - Normalized mount options.
- **`data`** - Data passed to init.
- **`ctx`** - **Context** (see below).
- **`parent`** / **`children`** - Component tree (parent may be Komponent or Intent).

**Methods:**

- **`find(selector)`** - `hostEl.querySelector(selector)`.
- **`findAll(selector)`** - `hostEl.querySelectorAll(selector)` as array.
- **`mount()`** - Run mount (fetch, render, init). Returns a Promise; usually called internally.
- **`scan({ replaceExisting })`** - Scan this component’s host for `data-komponent` and mount children (once per lifetime unless `replaceExisting: true`).
- **`remount()`** - Destroy this component and mount a fresh one on the same host.
- **`destroy()`** - Destroy children, destroy context; then clear `hostEl.innerHTML` (default) or remove `hostEl` from DOM (if `replaceHost` was used), and unlink from parent.

---

## Context (lifecycle and events)

Each Komponent (and Intent) has a **Context** `k.ctx`:

- **`k.ctx.id`** - Unique id.
- **`k.ctx.ready`** - True after init has run.
- **`k.ctx.state`** - `"initial"` | `"loading"` | `"rendering"` | `"init"` | `"ready"` | `"error"` | `"destroying"` | `"destroyed"`.
- **`k.ctx.parent`** - Parent context (if any).
- **`k.ctx.children`** - Child contexts.

**Events:** `on(event, fn, ctx)`, `off(event, fn, ctx)`, `trigger(event, payload)`.

- **`state:change`** - `{ state, ctx }`.
- **`state:<name>`** - When state becomes `<name>`.
- **`context:destroy`** - When context is being destroyed.

**Lifecycle:**

- **`onDestroy(fn)`** - Register a function to run when the context is destroyed (children destroyed first, then destroyers in reverse order).
- **`requestText(url, fetchOpts)`** - Fetch URL with abort on destroy or new request; returns response text or null if stale/destroyed.
- **`requestAbort()`** - Abort current request.
- **`emitUp(event, payload)`** - Trigger event on this context and each parent up the tree.
- **`emitRoot(event, payload)`** - Trigger event on the root context.
- **`destroy()`** - Abort request, destroy children, run destroyers, clear events.

---

## Init convention

Fetched HTML may contain a `<script>` that defines:

```javascript
function init_komponent(k, data) {
  // k = Komponent (or Intent) instance
  // data = opts.data
  // Use k.ctx.onDestroy(() => { ... }) for cleanup
}
```

If present, this function is called after the fragment is rendered into the host. Scripts are stripped from the fragment; only the function is extracted and run in an isolated scope.

---

## Intents (headless)

Intents load component HTML and run its init **without** rendering into a host. Use for modals, workers, or logic-only “components”.

**Fluent builder:**

```javascript
const intent = await komponentor.intent("modal.html|id=1")
  .data("model", myModel)
  .data({ source: k })
  .send({ parent: k });
// intent.ctx.ready, intent.data; intent may mount DOM inside its init
```

**Convenience:**

```javascript
const intent = await komponentor.runIntent("service/worker.html", { task: "sync" });
```

- **`parent`** - Optional Komponent or Intent; the new Intent is attached as child and destroyed when parent is destroyed.
- Intent has **`ctx`**, **`url`**, **`data`**, **`children`**, **`run()`**, **`destroy()`**. It does not replace any DOM; init can use `komponentor.mount()` if needed.

---

## Hash router

```javascript
komponentor.route({
  outlet: "#app",           // selector for mount target
  routes: {
    "#/": "view1.html",
    "#/users/:id": "user.html"
  },
  notFound: "404.html"      // optional
});
```

- Routes are matched by hash (e.g. `#/users/5`). Pattern `:id` captures one segment.
- On match, the outlet is mounted with `url` and `data: { route: { hash, params } }`, with `replace: true`.
- **`komponentor.navigate(hash)`** - Sets `location.hash` (handler runs on `hashchange`).

---

## Exposed classes

For advanced use, the following are attached to `komponentor`:

- **`Komponentor`** - Manager class.
- **`Komponent`** - Component node class.
- **`Context`** - Lifecycle/event context.
- **`HashRouter`** - Router class.
- **`Intent`** - Intent class.

---

## Load order

1. jQuery (optional).
2. `komponentor.js`.


---

## Quick example

```html
<div id="app" data-komponent="app.html"></div>
<script src="komponentor.js"></script>
<script>
  komponentor.config.baseUrl = "./";
  komponentor.root("#app", "app.html");
</script>
```

Or with router:

```javascript
komponentor.route({ outlet: "#app", routes: { "#/": "home.html" } });
```
